01-Frontend-React/questions-and-answers.md, before:

# React Interview Questions & Answers

## Q1. What is the Virtual DOM in React? Can you explain it with a simple analogy?

### Key Points (easy to remember):

- **Virtual DOM is a lightweight copy of the real DOM** (like a blueprint)
- Changes are made in the Virtual DOM first, not directly in the real DOM
- React (or similar libraries) compares the old and new virtual DOM (this is called **diffing**)
- Only the changed parts are updated in the real DOM (like replacing just one chair, not rebuilding the whole house)

### Example:

You have a list of 100 items.
👉 You update 1 item.

- **Real DOM**: May recalculate and redraw all 100 items (slow)
- **Virtual DOM**: Sees only 1 item changed → updates just that one (fast)

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Virtual DOM = "Edit the copy first, then update only what's needed in the real thing."

---

## Q2. How do React hooks like useState and useEffect work under the hood?

### `useState` - How it works:

`useState` works by telling React: **"Hey, remember this value across renders."**

- It returns a state variable and a setter function
- When you call the setter, React doesn't change the variable directly
- Instead, it schedules a re-render with the updated state

### Analogy:

Think of it like a **notebook (state)** and a **secretary (setter function)**.

You can't just scribble on the notebook yourself; you tell the secretary what to write, and they keep it updated properly each time.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> useState = "React remembers the value for you and triggers a re-render when you ask to update it."

### `useEffect` - How it works:

`useEffect` lets you run **side effects after a render** (e.g., API calls, subscriptions, logging, DOM updates).

- React guarantees the DOM is updated before running your effect
- Effects run after the component has been painted to the screen

### Analogy:

Imagine **painting a room (render)**.

Once the paint dries, you can now hang pictures or open windows (effects). If you try too early, you'll mess up the paint job.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> useEffect = "Do this after the render is done and the DOM is ready."

---

## Q3. What is the difference between controlled and uncontrolled components?

### Controlled Component:

React controls the form input via state.

- The value of the input comes from React state
- Changes are handled by a setter function
- **Example:** `<input value={state} onChange={setState} />`

### Uncontrolled Component:

The DOM controls the input.

- React doesn't track the value
- You access it using refs when needed
- **Example:** `<input ref={myRef} />`

### Analogy:

- **Controlled** → You're steering the car (React state controls input)
- **Uncontrolled** → The car moves on its own; you just check the speedometer when needed (DOM controls input)

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Controlled = React owns the value. Uncontrolled = DOM owns the value.

---

## Q4. Why do we need keys in React lists?

### Purpose:

Keys are unique identifiers for elements in a list.

- They help React efficiently compare old and new virtual DOM during diffing
- So only the changed elements are updated in the real DOM
- React can track which items were added, removed, or reordered

### Without keys:

React may reuse elements incorrectly, causing bugs or unnecessary re-renders because it cannot reliably match old vs new items.

### Analogy:

Think of keys like **name tags at a conference**.

If everyone has a unique tag (key), you know exactly who changed seats. Without them, you might mix people up.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Keys = "Unique IDs so React knows which item is which across renders."

---

## Q5. Can you explain what "lifting state up" means with an example?

### Concept:

Lifting state up means moving state from a child component to its nearest common parent so multiple children can access and modify the same state without prop drilling too deeply.

### Example:

Two input fields in different child components need to share the same value.

Instead of each having its own state, move the state to the parent and pass it down as props.

### Analogy:

Think of a **thermostat (state)** in the living room (parent).

Both bedroom and kitchen sensors (children) read and adjust the same thermostat instead of each having separate controls.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Lifting state up = "Move shared state to the nearest common parent."

---

## Q6. How does React handle re-rendering optimization? (memo, useCallback, etc.)

### React optimizations:

- **`useMemo`** → Caches the result of expensive calculations so they are not recomputed on every render
- **`useCallback`** → Caches a function reference so child components don't re-render unnecessarily
- **`React.memo`** → Wraps a component to prevent re-rendering if props haven't changed

### Analogy:

Think of `useMemo` as a **saved calculation in your notebook** — you don't redo it every time.

`useCallback` is like **reusing the same instruction manual** instead of writing it from scratch each time.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> useMemo = cache values, useCallback = cache functions, React.memo = skip re-render if props unchanged.

---

## Q7. What is the difference between client-side rendering (CSR) and server-side rendering (SSR)?

### Definition:

- **CSR (Client-Side Rendering):** The browser downloads a mostly empty HTML and renders the UI using JavaScript on the client side
- **SSR (Server-Side Rendering):** The server generates the full HTML and sends it to the browser, which can display content immediately

### Example:

- **CSR** → React SPA where HTML is minimal; content loads after JS executes
- **SSR** → Next.js page rendered on the server, sent fully formed HTML to the client

### Analogy:

- **CSR** → You get a Lego kit (JS) and assemble the model (UI) yourself at home
- **SSR** → Someone pre-builds the Lego model (HTML) and gives it to you ready-to-display

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> CSR = Browser builds UI. SSR = Server builds UI and sends ready HTML.

---

## Q8. What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous JavaScript?

### Definition:

- **Synchronous JS:** Code runs line by line. Each operation waits for the previous one to finish
- **Asynchronous JS:** Code can run without waiting for previous operations to finish (non-blocking)

### Example:

- **Synchronous** → `console.log(1); console.log(2);` prints 1 then 2 in order
- **Asynchronous** → `fetch()` API call continues running while other code executes

### How it works (Call Stack, Event Loop, Queue):

1. **Call Stack:** Where JavaScript executes synchronous code (LIFO - Last In First Out)
2. **Web APIs:** Handle async operations (setTimeout, fetch, DOM events) outside the call stack
3. **Callback Queue (Task Queue):** Holds callbacks from completed async operations
4. **Event Loop:** Continuously checks if the call stack is empty. If empty, it pushes callbacks from the queue to the call stack

**Flow:**
```
Sync code → Call Stack (executes immediately)
Async code → Web APIs → Callback Queue → Event Loop → Call Stack (when empty)
```

### Analogy:

- **Synchronous** → Waiting in line at a coffee shop; each person is served one by one
- **Asynchronous** → Ordering coffee and getting a pager; you can continue shopping while waiting for your order

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Sync = blocking (wait in line). Async = non-blocking (do other things while waiting).

---

## Q9. How do Promises and async/await simplify asynchronous code?

### Concept:

Both handle asynchronous operations, avoiding callback hell.

- **Promises:** Use `.then()` and `.catch()` to handle async results. Can be used anywhere
- **async/await:** Syntactic sugar over Promises. Makes async code look like synchronous code. Must be inside an `async` function

### Example:

```javascript
// Promise
fetch(url).then(res => res.json()).then(data => console.log(data));

// async/await
async function getData() {
  const res = await fetch(url);
  const data = await res.json();
  console.log(data);
}
```

### Analogy:

- **Promises** → Ordering food online and checking the tracking page
- **async/await** → Ordering food and waiting in one place until it arrives (cleaner flow)

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Promises = chaining .then(). async/await = write async code like sync code.

---

## Q10. Can you explain how the event loop works in JavaScript?

### Concept:

JavaScript is single-threaded.

- Executes code line by line via the **call stack**
- Asynchronous tasks (like `setTimeout` or `fetch`) go to the **callback queue**
- Once the call stack is empty, the **event loop** moves tasks from the callback queue to the stack for execution

### How it works:

1. **Synchronous code** runs first on the call stack
2. **Async operations** are handed off to Web APIs (browser/Node.js environment)
3. When async operations complete, their callbacks are placed in the **callback queue**
4. The **event loop** constantly checks: "Is the call stack empty?"
5. If yes, it takes the first callback from the queue and pushes it to the call stack

### Analogy:

Imagine a **chef (call stack)** cooking orders one by one.

Long tasks (async) are put on a **side counter (callback queue)**.

When the chef finishes current orders, they pick the next task from the side counter.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Event loop = "Move callbacks from queue to call stack when stack is empty."

---

Commit message:

Add table of contents to React questions and answers
Added clickable navigation links for all 10 React interview questions to improve document accessibility and user experience.

01-Frontend-React/questions-and-answers.md, after:

# React Interview Questions & Answers

## Table of Contents

1. [What is the Virtual DOM in React? Can you explain it with a simple analogy?](#q1-what-is-the-virtual-dom-in-react-can-you-explain-it-with-a-simple-analogy)
2. [How do React hooks like useState and useEffect work under the hood?](#q2-how-do-react-hooks-like-usestate-and-useeffect-work-under-the-hood)
3. [What is the difference between controlled and uncontrolled components?](#q3-what-is-the-difference-between-controlled-and-uncontrolled-components)
4. [Why do we need keys in React lists?](#q4-why-do-we-need-keys-in-react-lists)
5. [Can you explain what "lifting state up" means with an example?](#q5-can-you-explain-what-lifting-state-up-means-with-an-example)
6. [How does React handle re-rendering optimization? (memo, useCallback, etc.)](#q6-how-does-react-handle-re-rendering-optimization-memo-usecallback-etc)
7. [What is the difference between client-side rendering (CSR) and server-side rendering (SSR)?](#q7-what-is-the-difference-between-client-side-rendering-csr-and-server-side-rendering-ssr)
8. [What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous JavaScript?](#q8-what-is-the-difference-between-synchronous-and-asynchronous-javascript)
9. [How do Promises and async/await simplify asynchronous code?](#q9-how-do-promises-and-asyncawait-simplify-asynchronous-code)
10. [Can you explain how the event loop works in JavaScript?](#q10-can-you-explain-how-the-event-loop-works-in-javascript)

---

## Q1. What is the Virtual DOM in React? Can you explain it with a simple analogy?

### Key Points (easy to remember):

- **Virtual DOM is a lightweight copy of the real DOM** (like a blueprint)
- Changes are made in the Virtual DOM first, not directly in the real DOM
- React (or similar libraries) compares the old and new virtual DOM (this is called **diffing**)
- Only the changed parts are updated in the real DOM (like replacing just one chair, not rebuilding the whole house)

### Example:

You have a list of 100 items.
👉 You update 1 item.

- **Real DOM**: May recalculate and redraw all 100 items (slow)
- **Virtual DOM**: Sees only 1 item changed → updates just that one (fast)

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Virtual DOM = "Edit the copy first, then update only what's needed in the real thing."

---

## Q2. How do React hooks like useState and useEffect work under the hood?

### `useState` - How it works:

`useState` works by telling React: **"Hey, remember this value across renders."**

- It returns a state variable and a setter function
- When you call the setter, React doesn't change the variable directly
- Instead, it schedules a re-render with the updated state

### Analogy:

Think of it like a **notebook (state)** and a **secretary (setter function)**.

You can't just scribble on the notebook yourself; you tell the secretary what to write, and they keep it updated properly each time.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> useState = "React remembers the value for you and triggers a re-render when you ask to update it."

### `useEffect` - How it works:

`useEffect` lets you run **side effects after a render** (e.g., API calls, subscriptions, logging, DOM updates).

- React guarantees the DOM is updated before running your effect
- Effects run after the component has been painted to the screen

### Analogy:

Imagine **painting a room (render)**.

Once the paint dries, you can now hang pictures or open windows (effects). If you try too early, you'll mess up the paint job.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> useEffect = "Do this after the render is done and the DOM is ready."

---

## Q3. What is the difference between controlled and uncontrolled components?

### Controlled Component:

React controls the form input via state.

- The value of the input comes from React state
- Changes are handled by a setter function
- **Example:** `<input value={state} onChange={setState} />`

### Uncontrolled Component:

The DOM controls the input.

- React doesn't track the value
- You access it using refs when needed
- **Example:** `<input ref={myRef} />`

### Analogy:

- **Controlled** → You're steering the car (React state controls input)
- **Uncontrolled** → The car moves on its own; you just check the speedometer when needed (DOM controls input)

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Controlled = React owns the value. Uncontrolled = DOM owns the value.

---

## Q4. Why do we need keys in React lists?

### Purpose:

Keys are unique identifiers for elements in a list.

- They help React efficiently compare old and new virtual DOM during diffing
- So only the changed elements are updated in the real DOM
- React can track which items were added, removed, or reordered

### Without keys:

React may reuse elements incorrectly, causing bugs or unnecessary re-renders because it cannot reliably match old vs new items.

### Analogy:

Think of keys like **name tags at a conference**.

If everyone has a unique tag (key), you know exactly who changed seats. Without them, you might mix people up.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Keys = "Unique IDs so React knows which item is which across renders."

---

## Q5. Can you explain what "lifting state up" means with an example?

### Concept:

Lifting state up means moving state from a child component to its nearest common parent so multiple children can access and modify the same state without prop drilling too deeply.

### Example:

Two input fields in different child components need to share the same value.

Instead of each having its own state, move the state to the parent and pass it down as props.

### Analogy:

Think of a **thermostat (state)** in the living room (parent).

Both bedroom and kitchen sensors (children) read and adjust the same thermostat instead of each having separate controls.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Lifting state up = "Move shared state to the nearest common parent."

---

## Q6. How does React handle re-rendering optimization? (memo, useCallback, etc.)

### React optimizations:

- **`useMemo`** → Caches the result of expensive calculations so they are not recomputed on every render
- **`useCallback`** → Caches a function reference so child components don't re-render unnecessarily
- **`React.memo`** → Wraps a component to prevent re-rendering if props haven't changed

### Analogy:

Think of `useMemo` as a **saved calculation in your notebook** — you don't redo it every time.

`useCallback` is like **reusing the same instruction manual** instead of writing it from scratch each time.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> useMemo = cache values, useCallback = cache functions, React.memo = skip re-render if props unchanged.

---

## Q7. What is the difference between client-side rendering (CSR) and server-side rendering (SSR)?

### Definition:

- **CSR (Client-Side Rendering):** The browser downloads a mostly empty HTML and renders the UI using JavaScript on the client side
- **SSR (Server-Side Rendering):** The server generates the full HTML and sends it to the browser, which can display content immediately

### Example:

- **CSR** → React SPA where HTML is minimal; content loads after JS executes
- **SSR** → Next.js page rendered on the server, sent fully formed HTML to the client

### Analogy:

- **CSR** → You get a Lego kit (JS) and assemble the model (UI) yourself at home
- **SSR** → Someone pre-builds the Lego model (HTML) and gives it to you ready-to-display

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> CSR = Browser builds UI. SSR = Server builds UI and sends ready HTML.

---

## Q8. What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous JavaScript?

### Definition:

- **Synchronous JS:** Code runs line by line. Each operation waits for the previous one to finish
- **Asynchronous JS:** Code can run without waiting for previous operations to finish (non-blocking)

### Example:

- **Synchronous** → `console.log(1); console.log(2);` prints 1 then 2 in order
- **Asynchronous** → `fetch()` API call continues running while other code executes

### How it works (Call Stack, Event Loop, Queue):

1. **Call Stack:** Where JavaScript executes synchronous code (LIFO - Last In First Out)
2. **Web APIs:** Handle async operations (setTimeout, fetch, DOM events) outside the call stack
3. **Callback Queue (Task Queue):** Holds callbacks from completed async operations
4. **Event Loop:** Continuously checks if the call stack is empty. If empty, it pushes callbacks from the queue to the call stack

**Flow:**
```
Sync code → Call Stack (executes immediately)
Async code → Web APIs → Callback Queue → Event Loop → Call Stack (when empty)
```

### Analogy:

- **Synchronous** → Waiting in line at a coffee shop; each person is served one by one
- **Asynchronous** → Ordering coffee and getting a pager; you can continue shopping while waiting for your order

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Sync = blocking (wait in line). Async = non-blocking (do other things while waiting).

---

## Q9. How do Promises and async/await simplify asynchronous code?

### Concept:

Both handle asynchronous operations, avoiding callback hell.

- **Promises:** Use `.then()` and `.catch()` to handle async results. Can be used anywhere
- **async/await:** Syntactic sugar over Promises. Makes async code look like synchronous code. Must be inside an `async` function

### Example:

```javascript
// Promise
fetch(url).then(res => res.json()).then(data => console.log(data));

// async/await
async function getData() {
  const res = await fetch(url);
  const data = await res.json();
  console.log(data);
}
```

### Analogy:

- **Promises** → Ordering food online and checking the tracking page
- **async/await** → Ordering food and waiting in one place until it arrives (cleaner flow)

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Promises = chaining .then(). async/await = write async code like sync code.

---

## Q10. Can you explain how the event loop works in JavaScript?

### Concept:

JavaScript is single-threaded.

- Executes code line by line via the **call stack**
- Asynchronous tasks (like `setTimeout` or `fetch`) go to the **callback queue**
- Once the call stack is empty, the **event loop** moves tasks from the callback queue to the stack for execution

### How it works:

1. **Synchronous code** runs first on the call stack
2. **Async operations** are handed off to Web APIs (browser/Node.js environment)
3. When async operations complete, their callbacks are placed in the **callback queue**
4. The **event loop** constantly checks: "Is the call stack empty?"
5. If yes, it takes the first callback from the queue and pushes it to the call stack

### Analogy:

Imagine a **chef (call stack)** cooking orders one by one.

Long tasks (async) are put on a **side counter (callback queue)**.

When the chef finishes current orders, they pick the next task from the side counter.

### ⚡ One-liner to remember:
> Event loop = "Move callbacks from queue to call stack when stack is empty."

---
